Overview:
Sponge Finance enables credit default swap (CDS) like mechanics on loans against long tail assets by allowing lenders to hedge both default risk and the volatility of collateral. These mechanics provide benefits to credit availability in long tail credit markets by increasing the loan-to-value (LTV) for borrowers, and offering predictable risk parameters for lenders.


Why Credit Markets are Important For Long Tail Assets:
        Smart contract technology unlocks trustless, peer to peer and peer to pool lending which not only increases the overall capital efficiency of DeFi, but also allows for unique investment decisions not possible before. Platforms like AAVE and Compound have been providing these features to lenders and borrowers of large cap crypto and stablecoins for over half a decade, becoming highly popular in 2020. What these platforms lack are options for users interested in lending and borrowing against more exotic and typically less-liquid assets.
        Credit markets are highly important for these types of long-tail assets as they allow for even greater capital efficiency across DeFi. Given the volatile nature of these assets and the limited visibility provided by oracles, many current protocols rely on peer to peer systems rather than peer to pool. Of course the major drawback to this model is overall efficiency given a borrower must match with a lender with agreeable terms. Additionally, these loans are typically given at a lower LTV and higher interest rate given the risk of the asset lent against. 


Typically the process goes as follows:
1. Alice puts up a variable offer to lend 10 ETH against X BLUR with the terms (45% APY, MAX 20% LTV, MAX 60 days)
2. Bob takes the terms and receives 1 ETH against X BLUR (20% LTV)
3. Given the stipulated LTV and duration, an oracle is not needed and a liquidation event only occurs when Bob fails to pay Alice within the stated duration.
4. Assume Bob pays back Alice within terms 


What Problems does Sponge Finance solve?
        A common inefficiency with long tail credit markets is low credit utilization and availability. Given the higher risk associated with lending against less liquid, more volatile assets, loan-to-value (LTV) is often much lower. This restricts borrowing availability and limits lenders ability to capitalize on the higher interest rates typically present in higher risk collateral loans.


What Are Sponge Pools?
        In a way, sponge pools can be thought of as a synthetic put-option on the collateral token as Sponge depositors assume control of collateral given a default event. Depositors benefit from insurance premiums paid by lenders and lenders benefit from the option to hedge both default risk and collateral volatility. All else equal, given the option to hedge risk capacity, lenders should be more confident in providing higher LTV loans.
        Sponge pools are separate to each asset and stipulate the total protection available to lenders. As a result, lenders can structure loans with an understanding of sponge pool depth and availability. Lenders can then claim a portion of the pool after making a loan to reserve that portion of insurance to cover their risk. Upon claiming the insurance pool, lenders begin paying the pool specified interest rate and deposit their collateral tokens.
        
Process Example:


5. Alice lends 1 ETH against X BLUR with the terms (60% APY, MAX 75% LTV, MAX 60 days)
6. Bob receives 1 ETH against X BLUR (75% LTV)
7. Alice can then claim 1 ETH worth of the insurance pool, deposit X collateral tokens and begin paying interest.
   1. Note: ETH claimed from the pool is prorated among all depositors (e.g. Depositor A owns 25% of the pool and Depositor B owns 75% of the pool, they each also own that same ratio of the “CDS”.)
8. Interest is distributed pro rata to pool depositors
9. In the event of a default, the Alice keeps 1 ETH and the pool receives X BLUR, distributed pro rata to pool depositors


        In this example, Alice benefits from a hedge to both default and collateral volatility risk and the pool depositors benefit from interest payments and BLUR tokens “purchased” at the exchange rate on the day of pool interaction. It is important to note Alice can choose to hedge part or all of her loan with the insurance pool, offering a more dynamic hedging option. Additionally, the interest paid to Sponge pools is dynamic depending on the loan’s LTV at the time of pool interaction.


Final Thoughts:
        Sponge Finance introduces novel mechanics to allow lenders to hedge both default risk and collateral volatility. The protocol aims to not only create unique yield opportunities for depositors, but also to foster a more robust credit market for long tail assets.








*